### Atomism and the Birth of Nuclear Physics

“How small can things get?” is one of the oldest questions that great minds of all centuries tried to tackle. A piece of paper can be torn into two halves and those two halves can be torn into two new halves. One can continue this recursive procedure infinitely many times to obtain smaller pieces, well at least according to common logic. This is similar to what Zeno had pointed out in the 5th century B.C. in his popularly known “Achilles and the Tortoise paradox”.

Our Greek hero Achilles known for his swift foot, let’s suppose could run 10 times faster than a tortoise and if the tortoise was given a 100m head-start; how the race would have panned out? When Achilles covered 100m the tortoise would have been 10m ahead of him and when Achilles covered 10m the tortoise would have been 1m ahead of him. Therefore, at every instant, the tortoise would always stay ahead; does this mean that Achilles could never have caught up with the tortoise? People knew that Achilles could have overtaken the tortoise after some distance if it were an actual race.

Today we know that this convergent series sums to 111.11 and Achilles would have overtaken the tortoise after covering a distance of 111.11m. Back in those days, people did not know convergent series. Perhaps they knew very well that the universe didn’t follow Zeno’s logic. Perhaps there was a small discrete distance that cannot be broken down further and this discrete indivisible distance could have answered the paradox.

We see this paradox tending to an indivisible/atomistic view of the universe where the universe contains indivisible discrete matter known as atoms. We are way past this now and today we know that atoms have their own constituents: a central nucleus and fundamental leptons (here electrons) that have their distribution around the nucleus.

Now, what is the size of the nucleus?   
We know today that most of the atom is empty and every atom has its central nucleus where most of the mass of the atom resides, how did we get to know the existence of a central nucleus? The answer is sheer desperation in a way XD! A frustrated physicist’s line of attack is to throw things at his disposal at problematic objects and expect something to happen. Heavyweights known back then were the alpha particles. Hans Geiger along with Ernst Marsden in the year 1909 aimed these projectiles at gasses and thin sheets of metal.

Their observations shook the world as 1 in 8000 alpha particles backscattered. Rutherford another genius mind of the century quoted “It was quite the most incredible event that has ever happened to me in my life. It was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit you.” The atom which was then thought to be empty should not have withstood an assault from an alpha particle. To understand Rutherford’s ingenious explanation for the observed backscattering let us perform a few calculations.

Right of the back we know the alpha particles are positively charged, now consider a plum pudding model that was proposed by J J Thompson (where positive and negative charges are distributed evenly in a sphere) from Gauss law we can deduce,  
$$E.4\pi R² ={\rho * {4 \over 3} \pi R³ \over \epsilon_0}$$  
where $\rho$ is the density of the positive charge (we are not considering negative charges as it is the positive charge that repels the incoming projectile). The equation can also be written as $$E.4\pi R² ={Q \over \epsilon_0}$$$$\therefore E = {1 \over 4\pi \epsilon_0 }*{Q \over R²}$$  
 This tells us that for E to be large enough to backscatter the positive alpha particle hence R must be incredibly small in other words charge should be concentrated in a very small region of a very small radius which was exactly what was proposed by Rutherford in his 1911 paper. Rutherford deduced the the number the number of backscattered alpha particles was proportional to $cosec⁴(\theta)$ is $$N \space \alpha \space {cosec⁴(\theta) \over 2}$$  
 In simple terms, one can understand the Rutherford scattering experiment by dropping a pen onto a coin on a small square piece of paper multiple times (say at least 50 times) and counting the number of times it hits the coin and the number of times it misses. Given the dimensions of the square paper, one can deduce the size of the coin with the formula below. $$ {N_c \over N} = {A_{circle} \over A_{square}}$$  
$$ \therefore A_{circle} ={N_c \over N}*A_{square}$$  
A Monte-Carlo simulation of this experiment was performed on python and the following graphs were obtained. The square had its length set to 5 units. The simulation was performed with coins of sizes 0.75 units, 1.75 units, and 2.5 units. The graphs below demonstrate these results. As expected the more the number of shots the closer we get to the actual value.

This is a simplified way of performing Rutherford’s scattering experiment albeit Rutherford’s Scattering experiment has many more complexities involved. We calculate something called a cross-section of the nucleus which is a parameter that depends on the interaction between the projectile (in this case the alpha particles) and the target(in our case the nucleus). Applying an inverse Fourier Analysis on the scattered distribution gives a nuclear size of 2 (for lighter nucleus) — 7.5(for heavier nucleus) femtometers. The density of the nucleus was found to take the form of Woods — Saxon function with a diffused boundary.

This in a nutshell gave birth to nuclear physics and it has been 100 years since the scattering experiment. We are still on a quest to understand atoms and their nuclei. Fusion reactors have been the dream of the century. Understanding what the nucleus beholds could solve the energy crisis that mankind is facing today.